\chapter[On Constraining A Transiting Exoplanet's Rotation Rate With Its Transit Spectrum]{On Constraining A Transiting Exoplanet's Rotation Rate With Its Transit Spectrum}
\label{ch:rot}
\markright{}



\section{Introduction}
\label{rot_sec:intro}
Since the early 1990s, more than 280 planets have been discovered
orbiting other stars.  Roughly four fifths of the planets that have
been discovered are at least half as massive as Jupiter, and about a
quarter of the known planets orbit extremely close to their parent
star ($\lsim 0.1 {\rm~AU}$).  The Jupiter--mass planets that are in
close orbits are highly irradiated by their stars and are therefore
called ``Hot Jupiters.''  Twenty Hot Jupiters transit along the line
of sight between Earth and their star \citep{charbonneau_et_al2000,
  henry_et_al2000, konacki_et_al2003, bouchy_et_al2004,
  pont_et_al2004, konacki_et_al2004, konacki_et_al2005,
  udalski_et_al2002a, udalski_et_al2002b, udalski_et_al2002c,
  udalski_et_al2003, udalski_et_al2004, alonso_et_al2004,
  bouchy_et_al2005, mccullough_et_al2006, odonovan_et_al2006b,
  bakos_et_al2006, collier_et_al2006, burke_et_al2007,
  gillon_et_al2007, bakos_et_al2007a, bakos_et_al2007bb,
  johnskrull_et_al2007}\footnote{Corot--Exo--1b is reported at
  http://www.esa.int/esaCP/SEMCKNU681F\_index\_0.html.}.  Observations
of the transiting planets have confirmed their similarity to Jupiter
by revealing that these are gas giant planets, with radii comparable
to, or somewhat larger than Jupiter's \citep{charbonneau_et_al2000,
  henry_et_al2000, gaudi2005}.

The effects of the tidal torques experienced by an orbiting body have
been studied for a long time -- for an early seminal analyis, see
\citet{goldreich+peale1966}.  Such torques tend to synchronize a
satellite's rotation rate to its orbital rate, and if the torque is
sufficient this synchronization is achieved and the orbiter is said to
be ``tidally locked,'' as the Earth's Moon is.  The Hot Jupiter--class
extrasolar planets are thought to orbit sufficiently close to their
stars that their tidal locking timescales are much shorter than the
ages of the planets.  The planets, then, are expected to be tidally
locked to the stars, with one hemisphere in permanent day and the
other in permanent night \citep{harrington_et_al2006}.

A tidally locked Hot Jupiter will have a permanent sharp contrast in
temperature between the substellar point and the night side, which
must have a profound influence on the atmospheric dynamics.
\citet{showman+guillot2002} make simple predictions of the day/night
temperature difference ($\sim 500 {\rm ~K}$) and the speed of winds
(up to $\sim 2 {\rm ~km~s^{-1}}$), and their detailed,
three--dimensional simulations agree with their estimates.
Shallow--water simulations by \citet{cho_et_al2003} predict
longitudinally averaged zonal wind speeds of up to $400
{\rm~m~s^{-1}}$, with local winds approaching $2.7 {\rm~km~s^{-1}}$
(under some assumtions).  Simulations by \citet{cooper+showman2005}
predict a super--rotational jet (i.e., blowing eastward, where north
is defined by the right--hand rule) that blows the hottest part of the
planet downstream by about $60\degr$ from the substellar point.  Their
simulations predict supersonic winds exceeding $9 {\rm~km~s^{-1}}$ at
high latitudes, high in the atmosphere (where the optical depth is
low) and winds exceeding $4 {\rm~km~s^{-1}}$ at pressures near the
photosphere.  A Spitzer Space Telescope phase curve for $\upsilon$
Andromedae b rules out a phase--shift as large as $60\degr$ between
the substellar point and the hottest spot
\citep{harrington_et_al2006}, but a Spitzer phase curve for HD189733b
favors a $\sim 30\degr$ shift for that planet
\citep{knutson_et_al2007b}, so it remains unclear to what extent
available data indicate very strong photospheric winds.

Transmission spectroscopy is a way to probe the atmospheres of these
planets.  \citet{charbonneau_et_al2002} were the first to detect an
absorption feature in what is probably the atmosphere of HD209458b,
when they found that the effective radius of the planet increases
slightly at the wavelength of a strong sodium absorption doublet (the
sodium D lines) at $\sim 590 {\rm~nm}$.  In addition,
\citet{vidal-madjar_et_al2003, vidal-madjar_et_al2004} have reported a
number of absorption features in HD209458's transit spectra that are
due to various species (including hydrogen Lyman alpha, neutral
carbon, oxygen, and sulfur, and some ionization states of carbon,
nitrogen, and silicon) in a hot exosphere that is probably only
loosely bound to the planet.  Intriguingly, through analyzing the red
and near--IR portion of HD209458b's transit spectrum
\citet{barman2007} found a $10 \sigma$ detection of atmospheric water
vapor.  Several measurements of the planet's emission spectrum,
however, have found results that seem to be inconsistent with high
water abundance high in the atmosphere \citep{grillmair_et_al2007,
richardson_et_al2007, swain_et_al2007}.

Initial work by \citet{seager+sasselov2000} and a comprehensive study
by \citet[hereafter B01]{brown2001} have described various other
considerations that should affect the details of transit spectra,
including the orbital motion of a planet (a few tens of kilometers per
second in the radial direction), the rotation of the planet (a few
kilometers per second at the equator, according to the hypothesis that
the planet is tidally locked), and winds on the planet's surface (in
B01's analysis, up to $\sim 1 {\rm~km~s^{-1}}$).  These physical
effects should tend to broaden or impose Doppler shifts on absorption
features due to the planet's atmosphere.  B01 constructed an
impressively detailed model of radiative transfer through a Hot
Jupiter's atmosphere, assuming various models of zonal windflow
superimposed on an equatorial bulk rotation speed of $v_{\rm eq} = 2
{\rm~km~s^{-1}}$, which is approximately the value for HD209458b under
the assumption that it is tidally locked in its 3.5 day orbit.  He
finds the height of the cloud deck to be the most important parameter
that affects the transmission of light through the planet's
atmosphere.

The original discovery of the roughly Jupiter--mass planet in a close,
$\sim 4$ day orbit around 51 Pegasi \citep{mayor+queloz1995} prompted
interest in the dynamics and structure that must govern a highly
insolated gas giant planet \citep{guillot_et_al1996}.  Observations of
the transiting Hot Jupiters heightened this interest when they
revealed a puzzling feature of these planets: at least several of them
are a bit puffier than Jupiter, with diameters ranging from slightly
larger than Jupiter's to as much as $\sim 80\%$ larger.  It is not
clear what allows some planets to maintain such large radii.  It has
been suggested that if a Jovian planet migrates very quickly, from its
presumed formation location at least several AU from its star, to its
eventual several day orbit, then it might reach its final home before
it has cooled enough to shrink to Jupiter's radius.  Accordingly, some
authors have investigated the migration processes that lead gas giant
planets to such close orbits as have been found
\citep[e.g.][]{trilling_et_al2002}.  Others have investigated various
ways in which a gas giant could either be heated once it ends up near
its star, or otherwise maintain sufficient internal energy to sustain
its inflated size \citep{guillot+showman2002, burrows_et_al2003,
laughlin_et_al2005, bodenheimer_et_al2003, guillot2005,
burrows_et_al2007, chabrier+baraffe2007}.  Although various physical
mechanisms have been suggested as the apparently missing energy source
that allows the unexpectedly large radii sometimes seen, the lesson of
these investigations {\it in toto} is that it is not easy to explain
the inflated sizes, either in terms of the greater stellar flux that
these planets experience by virtue of being so close to their stars,
or in terms of their evolutionary migratory histories.  A recent paper
by \citet{winn+holman2005} propose that, contrary to the commonly
accepted paradigm, Hot Jupiters might be trapped in a Cassini state
with large obliquity, in which the spin--axis precesses in resonance
with the orbit, but lies nearly in the orbital plane.  Such a state
might be stable against perturbation, and yet able to generate
sufficient internal energy to increase a gas giant planet's radius to
the observed values.  In light of an even more recent analysis by
\citet{levrard_et_al2007}, however, it appears that the probability of
capture into a Cassini state 2 resonance is quite small for a planet
with semi--major axis $a < 0.1 {\rm ~AU}$.  Furthermore,
\citet{fabrycky_et_al2007} argue that even if a planet is captured
into Cassini state 2, it is likely to remain there for a time that is
short relative to the age of the system.

High--resolution transit spectra that have high signal--to--noise
ratios will allow us to distinguish between various models of orbit,
rotation, and weather, as discussed by B01.  Because the orbit is
known to high accuracy, and the predictions of the effects of weather
(or climate) are highly uncertain, as described above, we will focus
in this paper on the much more easily predicted effect of a planet's
rotation on a transit--spectrum.  If we neglect winds, then the
large--obliquity Cassini state described by \citet{winn+holman2005}
should have a spectral signature that is very similar to that of a
non--rotating model.  In contrast, the rotation of a tidally locked
planet should impose a Doppler distortion on spectral lines arising
from the planet's atmosphere that is roughly an overall redshift
during ingress, as the planet is just entering the stellar disk, and a
similar distortion that is roughly an overall blueshift during egress,
as the planet is just exiting the disk.  During mid--transit, the
spectral distortion is more similar to rotational broadening.  In the
present investigation, we address whether there is any hope that these
spectral distortions from tidally--locked rotation can be observed.
In our study, we focus only on the sodium doublet detected by
\citet{charbonneau_et_al2002}.  As we will show below, the sensitivity
of a measurement of rotation scales with the square root of the number
of lines under consideration.  Model spectra from, e.g.,
\citet{sudarsky_et_al2003} and \citet{barman2007} predict a strong
potassium doublet at $\sim 770 {\rm~nm}$, strong water absorption
features in the near--infrared, and a handful of near--UV lines.  If
some of these are confirmed in the atmosphere of a transiting planet,
they will provide a modest increase in S/N.  Since the sodium lines
are expected to be the strongest, however, it seems unlikely that
observing multiple lines will yield a boost in S/N by more than a
factor of a few.

We emphasize that it may not be at all justified to neglect winds.  It
is quite likely that there are super--rotational winds on Hot
Jupiters, which are probably necessary to heat the ``night'' side.  As
indicated above, some models predict, and the observed phase curve for
HD189733b suggests, that at the photosphere these winds might be
significantly (100\% or more) greater than the equatorial rotation
rate, and therefore might contribute importantly to the Doppler
distortion induced by the motion of the planet's atmosphere.
Nevertheless, in order to isolate the contribution of rotation, we do
neglect winds in this study.  The Doppler distortions that we predict
can therefore probably be taken as a lower bound on the distortions
that would be observed for a tidally--locked transiting Hot Jupiter.

We find that the spectral shifts induced by rotation will be difficult
to detect with current technology, but perhaps not insurmountably so,
at least with technology that might be available in the
not--to--distant future.  The measurements we will describe are
limited by a paucity of photons.  As such, their signal--to--noise
ratio will be enhanced by a bright star and a puffy planet (i.e., a
planet with a large scale--height).  HD209458 is at least a magnitude
brighter than any other star with a known transiting planet except
HD189733, and its planet is larger than HD189733b; so HD209458b should
be a better target than any other known transiting planet except
possibly HD189733b.  In this paper, we model the HD209458b system
because it is the best--studied system, and it is unlikely that any
currently--known planets would be significantly better targets.  In a
single transit, observations of HD209458 with a 6~m telescope that has
a high--resolution ($>50,000$) optical spectrograph with good
throughput ($\sim 18\%$) could only show the influence of tidally
locked rotation at the $\sim 0.2\sigma$ level.  With
ultrahigh--resolution ($\gsim 700,000$) and good throughput ($\sim
4\%$) this effect would still only show up at the $\sim 0.6 \sigma$
level.  In less than a year, the signal of rotation could be present
at five times the noise ($S/N = 5$).  Of course, a telescope with
larger collecting area, higher spectral resolution, or better
throughput would cause the signal to be apparent at that significance
level in less time.

Other studies have approached the problem of determining the rotation
rate from a different angle.  \citet{seager+hui2002} and
\citet{barnes+fortney2003} suggest that an oblate spheroid will have a
different transit light curve from a perfect sphere, and so measuring
the oblateness from transit photometry will provide a handle on the
rotation rate.  The oblateness is somewhat degenerate with several
other parameters that are not perfectly known, however, so they
conclude that it would be difficult to actually determine that
rotation rate in this manner.  The method we describe here could
eventually prove to be an important complement to other observations
to constrain the rotation rate.

In the remainder of this paper, we address this idea in detail.  One
complication that we discuss below is that the technique of this paper
is not immune from several near--degeneracies among the many
attributes of transiting extrasolar planets that influence light
curves or spectra.  Although it is likely that current or near--future
instruments will be sensitive enough that the spectral distortion
imposed by HD209458b's rotation (if it is tidally locked) is visible,
it might still be very challenging to discern the fingerprint of
rotation from other attributes that affect the spectra at a similar
level.  In this paper, we tackle the forward problem of calculating
the amount of distortion that is caused by rotation.  The inverse
problem -- determining from observations whether a planet is tidally
locked -- is more difficult and should be the topic of a future study.

The structure of the rest of this paper is as follows: In
\S~\ref{rot_sec:overview}, we describe qualitatively what happens to
the starlight received on Earth when a planet transits its star; we
give a rough order of magnitude estimate of the the magnitude and
detectability of the spectral distortions caused by tidally locked
rotation; and we briefly describe some technological progress and
remaining challenges relevant to our task of deducing bulk motions in
a planet's atmosphere from transit spectra.  In
\S~\ref{rot_sec:model}, we describe our computational model of a
transit spectrum.  In \S~\ref{rot_sec:results}, we describe the
results of our model according to various assumed input parameters.
In \S~\ref{rot_sec:disc}, we discuss the scaling of S/N on various
model parameters and we address the prospects of actually
observationally determining whether a transitting planet is tidally
locked.  In \S~\ref{rot_sec:conc}, we conclude by describing various
ways to boost our predicted S/N to a more optimistic value.



\section{Overview of the Problem}
\label{rot_sec:overview}

The practical feasibility of the investigation we undertake depends on
a few factors: understanding the various detailed processes that
affect the starlight that reaches Earth when a planet transits its
star; the magnitude of the distortion that tidally locked rotation
induces; and the technology available to measure such distortions.  In
this section, we give an overview of these three factors -- in
particular, in \S~\ref{rot_ssec:preview}, we give a simple estimate of
the results that we will later (in \S~\ref{rot_sec:results}) calculate
in detail.

\subsection{Relevant Processes}
\label{rot_ssec:processes}
A planet transiting in front of its star affects the starlight that
ultimately reaches Earth in many ways.  The motion of the planet's
atmosphere (rotation and winds) is a small perturbation on top of
several more dominant effects.  We therefore summarize below the
physical processes that are at least as significant as the effect of
tidally locked rotation.  Figure~\ref{rot_fig:schematic} schematically
represents this situation, and captures nearly all of the processes
described below: a rotating planet (of exaggerated relative size)
transits in front of a rotating star.  The figure depicts a snapshot
partway through ingress, when half of the planet is in front of the
stellar disk\footnote{The planet is above the star's equator to
represent a slight inclination in its orbit.}.  The white circle
indicates a hypothetical sharp demarcation between the opaque part of
the planet (in black) and the optically thin part, labeled
``Atmosphere'' (described further below).
\begin{figure}[p]
\plotone{figures/chapter4_rot/fig1.eps}
\caption[Rotating planet beginning to transit in front of rotating
star.]{Rotating planet beginning to transit in front of rotating star.
The vertical black arrows represent the rotation axes of the planet
and the star, and the curved arrows indicate the direction of rotation
for each.  The X's on the right--sides of both the planet and the star
indicate regions that are receding from the observer and are therefore
redshifted; the unmarked left sides of the planet and the star are
moving toward the observer and are therefore blueshifted.  The white
circle surrounding the opaque black part of the planet denotes the
cloud deck, or the boundary between the partially transparent and the
fully opaque portions of the planet's disk.  The planet is orbiting in
the same sense as both it and the star are rotating.  The planet is
shown above the star's midplane to represent the inclination of the
orbit relative to the line--of--sight.}
\label{rot_fig:schematic}
\end{figure}
\afterpage{\clearpage}

\begin{enumerate}
\label{list:transiteffects}
\item {\it Geometric Occultation}:\\ The largest effect is an overall
 dimming by a factor of roughly the ratio of the area of the planet to
 that of the star: $(R_p/R_*)^2$.  Since stars are not perfectly
 uniform disks, but instead tend to darken toward the limb at most
 visible wavelengths, the fractional dimming due to being in the
 planet's shadow tends to be slightly less than the ratio of the areas
 when the planet is near the edge of the stellar disk and slightly
 more than this ratio when the planet is near the center.
\item {\it Stellar Wobble}:\\ The primary spectral effect of the
 planet orbiting the star is the radial velocity wobble induced by the
 planet's gravity.  This periodic spectral shift is of course in
 effect during the transit, when, for a close--in planet like
 HD209458b, it has an influence on the order of $\sim \pm 10 {\rm
 ~m~s^{-1}}$.  This effect is a redshift as the planet begins to
 transit across the disk (during ingress) and a blueshift during
 egress.
\item {\it Rossiter--McLaughlin Effect}:\\ A more subtle effect arises
 because, during the transit, the planet moves across -- and therefore
 blocks -- parts of the star that have different recessional
 velocities.  If (as is expected) the planet's orbit is aligned with
 the star's spin, then during ingress the planet is blocking a part of
 the star that is slightly blueshifted, and during egress it is
 blocking a part of the star that is slightly redshifted.
 Figure~\ref{rot_fig:schematic} illustrates the planet blocking some
 of the bluest parts of the star during ingress.

The parts of the star that are occluded during ingress/egress have
spectra that are blue/redshifted by a velocity that is approximately
the equatorial rotational speed of the star, or about $\sim 1$-$2 {\rm
~km~s^{-1}}$ for a Sun--like star.  As the figure indicates, during
ingress/egress, the integrated spectrum of the remaining (unblocked)
parts of the star is on average slightly redder/bluer than it would be
if the planet were entirely transparent.  Therefore, during ingress,
the centroids of stellar lines are shifted slightly to the red, and
during egress the centroids are correspondingly shifted to the blue.

This so--called Rossiter--McLaughlin effect (RME), described
originally by \citet{rossiter1924} and \citet{mclaughlin1924} in the
case of eclipsing binary stars, adds to the shifts already caused by
the radial velocity induced by the planet's gravity, described in (2.)
above.  The RME has been described in depth more recently in the
context of extrasolar planets by \citet{ohta_et_al2005},
\citet{gimenez_et_al2006}, and \citet{gaudi+winn2007}.  These
centroid--shifts are expected to be comparable in magnitude to the
radial velocity wobble from the planet's gravity, and can be roughly
estimated as
\[
\left| \delta v_{\rm R-M} \right| \sim 1 {\rm ~km~s^{-1}} \times (R_p/R_*)^2 \sim 10 {\rm ~m~s^{-1}},
\]
In fact, the amount of the shift can be predicted precisely for a
given orientation of the planet's orbit, and so measuring the shift is
tantamount to measuring the alignment between the star's spin and the
planet's orbit.  Three years ago, \citet{winn_et_al2005} first found
that the spin of HD209458 and the orbital plane of its planet are
nearly aligned.  The degree of alignment has been measured for two
other systems -- \citet{winn_et_al2006} found that the spin of
HD189733 and its planet are also nearly aligned, and
\citet{narita_et_al2007} measured a mis--alignment between these two
vectors by $\sim (30 \pm 20)\degr$ in the TrES--1 system.
\item {\it Planet's Atmospheric Opacity}:\\ Furthermore, a gas--giant
 planet's opacity surely does not have a perfectly sharp discontinuity
 at an outer boundary, as a billiard ball does.  Instead, it has an
 extended atmosphere in which the opacity must vary more or less
 smoothly.  There may be a cloud layer, below which the planet is
 entirely opaque to tangential rays and above which the opacity varies
 smoothly.  Most critical to our investigation, at a given radius, the
 planet's opacity to tangential lines of sight must vary with
 wavelength, depending on the contents of its atmosphere.  At
 wavelengths of strong atomic or molecular transitions, the planet's
 atmosphere will be more opaque than at other wavelengths.  As a
 result, the effective radius of the planet, or the radius at which
 the optical depth along a tangential ray is of order unity, is
 greater at some wavelengths than at others.  These effects have been
 described in detail by B01.
\item {\it Planet's Orbital Motion}:\\ The motion of the planet's
 atmosphere must influence the transit spectrum in several delicate
 ways.  As B01 points out, there are three main mechanisms by which
 the motion of a planet's atmosphere relative to its star can affect
 the spectrum: the planet's orbital velocity along the
 line--of--sight, the planet's (possibly tidally locked) rotation, and
 winds in its atmosphere.  The largest effect of these three is the
 orbital velocity, which imposes a bulk blue/redshift during
 ingress/egress of $\sim 15 {\rm ~km~s^{-1}}$ to spectral lines
 arising from the planet's atmosphere.  These shifts are of opposite
 sign to the radial velocity wobble and to the shifts from the RME,
 and therefore tend to lessen the apparent RME slightly.
\item {\it Planet's Atmospheric Motion}:\\ The most dynamically
 interesting (and subtlest) effects are those caused by the planetary
 rotational velocity and atmospheric winds.  Since a tidally locked
 planet rotates in the same sense as it orbits, the rotational
 velocity of its outside edge has the same sign as its orbital
 velocity, and the rotational velocity of its inside edge has the
 opposite sign.  As a result, during the beginning of ingress and the
 end of egress, when only the inside edge of the planet is over the
 star, tidally locked rotation will impose a spectral distortion that
 is in the opposite sense of that caused by the bulk orbital velocity
 described in (5.) above, and that is in the same sense as the RME:
 the distortions are roughly equivalent to a relative redshift during
 ingress (graphically represented in Figure~\ref{rot_fig:schematic})
 and a relative blueshift during egress.  During mid--transit, with
 some parts of the rotating planet's atmosphere moving toward and
 other parts away from the star relative to an otherwise identical but
 non--rotating planet, the overall influence of the planet's rotation
 is approximately equivalent to rotational broadening.

Winds complicate the picture even further.  It is likely that winds
tend to rush from the substellar hot spot to the colder night side of
the planet.  With the substellar point on the opposite side of the
planet from Earth during a transit, this corresponds to winds rushing
toward us at several hundred to several thousand meters per second.
This would tend to blueshift the spectrum throughout the transit.
Zonal wind bands, somewhat similar to those on Jupiter but with much
higher speeds, or other more detailed winds, can have an even more
intricate effect.
\item {\it Additional Effects}:\\ If a transiting planet were to have
 nonzero orbital eccentricity, or rings, these could complicate a
 measurement of rotation rate.  Nonzero eccentricity would break the
 symmetry between ingress and egress.  Still, if the orbit were
 well-known, this could be modeled and taken into account.  It seems
 unlikely that a Hot Jupiter could maintain rings: Icy rings would
 sublimate, and, if not continuously replenished, dusty/rocky rings
 would quickly succumb to the Poynting--Robertson effect
 \citep{poynting1903,robertson1937}.  But if, somehow, a ring were to
 find a way to persevere around a transiting Hot Jupiter, it could
 confound -- perhaps hopelessly -- a measurement of rotation.  The
 consequences of rings for the Rossiter--McLaughlin effect are
 addressed in \citet{ohta_et_al2006}.  Saturn's rings are nearly
 four--times the area of the planet, so for a planet (with equatorial
 rings that are as relatively large as Saturn's) whose orbit is tilted
 an angle 0.1 (in radians) from edge-on, the rings would be $\sim
 40\%$ the area of the planet, which would increase the RME by $\sim
 40\%$.  Uncertainty about the presence and size of a ring introduces
 an uncertainty in the size of the RME effect that is probably larger
 than the size of the rotation effect.  Furthermore, a ring would
 occlude a (small) part of the planet's atmosphere, which would
 (slightly) reduce the strength of the rotation signal.
\end{enumerate}

Other interesting phenomena that primarily affect a transit light
curve, rather than the spectrum, include star--spots
\citep{silva2003}, atmospheric lensing \citep{hui+seager2002}, and
finite--speed--of--light effects \citep{loeb2005}.  Although
\citet{winn+holman2005} describe a possible configuration (Cassini
state 2) that would produce a spectral signature that is nearly
identical to what would be expected from a non--rotating planet, the
likelihood that any Hot Jupiters are in such a configuration might be
low, and it seems quite likely that {\it some} transiting planets are
not in this state.  Nonetheless, the motion of a transiting planet's
atmosphere -- rotational, wind, or other -- is clearly interesting,
and the basic technique that we describe below is applicable to any
model of atmospheric motion.

\subsection{Preview of Results}
\label{rot_ssec:preview}
A rough estimate of the velocity--shift that is imposed during ingress
to the centroids of the stellar Na D--lines by the planet's tidally
locked rotation (on top of the RME and the shift from the planet's
orbital velocity, both of which would be present even if the planet
were not rotating) is the following:
\begin{eqnarray}
\nonumber \delta v & \sim &  \left(\left< \cos[\phi] \right>_{-\pi/2}^{~\pi/2}\right) \times \left( \frac{1}{2} \times \frac{{R_p}^2}{{R_*}^2}\right) \times \left( \frac{2 \pi R_p \Pi_{\rm atm}}{\pi {R_p}^2} \right) \times v_{\rm eq} \\
\nonumber & \sim & 0.64 \times 1\% \times 15\% \times 2000 {\rm ~m~s^{-1}} \\
\label{rot_eq:Delta v estimated} & = & 1.9 {\rm ~m~s^{-1}}.
\end{eqnarray}
In this equation, $\phi$ is a planet--centered azimuthal angle, $R_p$
and $R_*$ are the planet's and star's radius, respectively, $\Pi_{\rm
atm}$ is the height of the planet's atmosphere, and $v_{\rm eq}$ is
the equatorial rotation speed.  The rotation speed at angle $\phi$ is
$v_{\rm eq} \cos[\phi]$.  We take the average of $\cos[\phi]$ from
$-\pi/2$ to $\pi/2$ to get the average planetary rotation speed.  We
have used $\Pi_{\rm atm} = 7500 {\rm ~km}$, or 15 times the presumed
scale height of $500 {\rm ~km}$, because the sodium lines are so
heavily saturated that at the assumed abundance and cloud deck height
in our model the line cores do not become optically thin until that
height.  \citet{burrows_et_al2004} and \citet{fortney2005} describe
how the optical depth along tangential rays is greater than the
optical depth on normal rays. The product
\[
\delta_{\rm atm} \approx \left( \frac{1}{2} \times \frac{{R_p}^2}{{R_*}^2}\right) \left( \frac{2 \pi R_p \Pi_{\rm atm}}{\pi {R_p}^2} \right) = \left(\frac{R_p}{R_*}\right)^2 \left( \frac{\Pi_{\rm atm}}{R_p} \right)
\]
is the ratio of the area of the portion of the planet's atmosphere
that is in front of the star halfway through ingress to the total area
of the disk of the star.  Based on this estimate, we expect a maximum
velocity shift of $\delta v \sim 190 {\rm ~cm~s^{-1}}$.  If we take
into account that HD209458b's orbit is actually slightly inclined
relative to the line of sight, the cosine average decreases to $\sim
0.45$, and the total estimate decreases to $\sim 140 {\rm~cm~s^{-1}}$.
This estimate is in reasonably good agreement with the
centroid--shifts predicted by the full model calculation below ($\sim
60 {\rm ~cm~s^{-1}}$); the difference between the estimates is most
likely due to the difference between the shapes of the stellar and
planetary lines.

We now estimate the signal--to--noise ratio for the detectability of
this effect in an observation of duration $\Delta t$, with a telescope
that has diameter $D$ and throughput efficiency $\eta$.  The signal is
the distortion of the spectrum relative to a non--rotating planet, and
for now we will assume that the noise is dominated by photon noise.
If a spectrum $F[\lambda]$ with a symmetric absorption feature of
depth $\Delta F$ centered at $\lambda_0$ is redshifted by an amount
$\Delta \lambda$ to $\widehat{F}[\lambda] \equiv F[\lambda - \Delta
\lambda]$, what is the integrated absolute difference
$|F-\widehat{F}|$ over some wavelength range $2L$ centered on
$\lambda_0$?  If the absorption feature is wide compared with $\Delta
\lambda$, then, by symmetry,
\begin{eqnarray}
\nonumber S & = & \int_{\lambda_0 - L}^{\lambda_0 + L} \left| F[\lambda] - F[\lambda - \Delta \lambda] \right| d\lambda \\
\label{rot_eq:signal integral} & \approx & 2 \int_{\lambda_0}^{\lambda_0 + L} \left( F[\lambda] - F[\lambda - \Delta \lambda] \right) d\lambda;
\end{eqnarray}
and if $\Delta \lambda$ is small then
\begin{eqnarray}
\nonumber S & \approx & 2 \Delta \lambda \int_{\lambda_0}^{\lambda_0 + L} F'[\lambda] d\lambda \\
\label{rot_eq:integrated diff} & \approx & 2 (\Delta \lambda) (\Delta F).
\end{eqnarray}

We may now estimate the S/N of our effect (for a single absorption
line) using the lesson of equation~(\ref{rot_eq:integrated diff}),
provided we know the absolute normalization of the stellar spectrum
(the number of photons per unit wavelength).  A spherical blackbody of
radius $R_*$ and temperature $T_*$, at distance $d$ from the
telescope, has a photon number flux at wavelength $\lambda$ of
\begin{eqnarray}
\nonumber \frac{d \dot{N}_\gamma}{d \lambda} & \sim & B_\lambda[\lambda,T] \left( \frac{1}{h c/\lambda} \right) \left( \frac{\pi {R_*}^2}{d^2} \right) \times \eta \pi (D/2)^2\\
\label{rot_eq:spectrum} & = & \frac{\pi^2 c}{2 \lambda^4 \left( \exp[(h c)/(\lambda k T_*)] -1 \right)} \times \eta \left(\frac{{R_* D}}{d}\right)^2,
\end{eqnarray}
where $B_\lambda$ is the Planck function.  Since the fractional
decrease in the spectrum at the line--center is approximately
$\delta_{\rm atm}$, we may express the parameter $\Delta F$ from
equation~(\ref{rot_eq:integrated diff}) as $\Delta F \approx
\delta_{\rm atm} (d \dot{N}_\gamma / d \lambda)$.  Similarly, since
the root--mean--square velocity shift during ingress is $\left< v^2
\right>^{1/2} \sim (1/2) \times( 2000 {\rm~m~s^{-1}}) = 1000 {\rm
~m~s^{-1}}$,\footnote{We write $(1/2) \times (2000 {\rm~m~s^{-1}})$
because the mean value of $\cos^2$ from $-\pi/2$ to $\pi/2$ is $1/2$}
we may express the parameter $\Delta \lambda$ as $\Delta \lambda \sim
(\left< v^2 \right>^{1/2} / c) \times \lambda_0$.  The distortion (the
signal) from a single line can therefore be estimated as
\begin{eqnarray}
\nonumber S & = & \delta N_\gamma \sim 2 (\Delta \lambda) \left( \delta_{\rm atm} \frac{d \dot{N}_\gamma}{d \lambda}\right) \Delta t\\
\label{rot_eq:signal estimate} & = & \frac{\pi^2 c \left(\delta_{\rm atm}\right) \Delta \lambda}{\lambda^4 \left( \exp[(h c)/(\lambda k T_*)] -1 \right)} \times \eta \left(\frac{{R_* D}}{d}\right)^2 (\Delta t).
\end{eqnarray}
The shot--noise is the square root of the number of photons in a
wavelength range $2L$ roughly equal to the FWHM of the line, or about
$7 {\rm ~km~s^{-1}}$ for a heavily saturated line such as the Na D
lines under consideration:
\begin{eqnarray}
\nonumber N & \sim & \sqrt{\frac{d \dot{N}_\gamma}{d\lambda} (2L) (\Delta t)} \\
\label{rot_eq:noise estimate} & \sim & \sqrt{\frac{\pi^2 L c (\Delta t)}{\lambda^4 \left( \exp[(h c)/(\lambda k T_*)] -1 \right)}} \times \sqrt{\eta} \left( \frac{R_* D}{d} \right).
\end{eqnarray}
We estimate the total signal--to--noise ratio arising from a single
absorption line, during an ingress integration of duration $\Delta t$, to be
roughly
\begin{eqnarray}
\nonumber S/N & \sim & \frac{\pi(\delta_{\rm atm})}{\sqrt{\exp[(h c)/(\lambda k T_*)] -1}} \left( \frac{ \Delta \lambda}{\lambda} \right) \left( \sqrt{\frac{c \Delta t}{ L}} \right) \left( \frac{R_* D}{d \lambda} \right) \sqrt{\eta} \\
\nonumber & \sim & \left( 6.6\times 10^{-4} \right) \left( 3.3\times 10^{-6} \right) \left( 2.1\times 10^{11} \right) \left( 5.0\times 10^{-3} \right) \sqrt{\eta} \\
\label{rot_eq:SN estimate} & \sim & 2.3 \sqrt{\eta}.
\end{eqnarray}
The above calculation uses parameters for HD209458 and its planet, a
sodium D line, and a 6~m telescope: $\lambda = 600 {\rm~nm}$; $\Delta
t = 1000 {\rm~s}$; $R_* = 7.3\times 10^{10} {\rm~cm}$; $T_* = 6100
{\rm ~K}$, $d = 47 {\rm~pc}$; and $D = 600 {\rm~cm}$.  For two
identical absorption lines, we gain a factor of $2^{1/2}$ in S/N, and
for egress we gain another factor of $2^{1/2}$, giving a total
one--transit S/N of roughly $4.6 \eta^{1/2}$, not counting the
additional signal available during mid--transit (see further
discussion below).  This S/N ratio is in principle independent of the
spectral resolution of the spectrograph, for sufficiently high
spectral resolution.  For low spectral resolution, however, the S/N
could be lower than this estimate (below, we conclude that the S/N
loses its dependence on resolving power for spectral resolution
$\gsim$~500,000).

There were several optimistic assumptions that went into this
estimate.  Still, this rough estimate of the degree to which a
planet's rotation influences its transit spectrum indicates that the
more in--depth study that we perform below is warranted.

\subsection{Available Technology}
\label{rot_ssec:tech}
Detecting the centroid--shifts caused by tidally locked rotation
($\lsim 1 {\rm ~m~s^{-1}}$) will require very precise measurements of
stellar transit spectra.  Obtaining such high precision spectra will
be quite challenging, for a number of reasons, several of which were
described in the groundbreaking paper by \citet{butler_et_al1996} that
analyzes the limits of Doppler precision.  Of particular concern,
stellar pulsations and turbulent motions in stellar photospheres can
cause small regions of the stellar disk to move at up to $300 {\rm
~m~s^{-1}}$ \citep{dravins1985, ulrich1991}.  These motions tend to
average out to produce stellar spectra that are largely stable; but it
is likely that at least some giant convection cells are not small
relative to the size of a planet, and these could introduce a
contaminating source of noise when they are located behind the planet
or its atmosphere.  \citet{butler_et_al1996} reviewed what was then
known about the variability of stellar line--profiles; the upshot is
that line--widths may vary by up to several meters per second over
several years, but it is not clear to what extent spurious apparent
velocity shifts may be induced by convection, and such stellar jitters
may prove to be a significant source of noise that would render it
difficult to measure sub meter--per--second velocity--shifts.  More
recently, \citet{bouchy_et_al2005b} have actually achieved sub
meter--per--second accuracy with the HARPS instrument (spectral
resolution of 115,000), and they have found a dispersion in
night--averaged radial velocity measurements for a particular star
(HD160691) of $\sim 0.4 {\rm ~cm~s^{-1}}$ for nights when they took
many ($\gsim 200$) observations.  Since in our situation (taking
spectra during ingress, say) we have minutes, not hours, available,
the rms scatter in ingress--averaged radial velocity measurements is
likely to be larger than what they found.  In addition to the
difficulties posed by several systematic sources of noise, achieving
sufficient photon statistics will be difficult for two reasons: for a
given throughput efficiency $\eta$, higher spectral resolution means
fewer photons per bin; and $\eta$ tends to decrease with increasing
spectral resolution $R_S$.

By the mid--1990s, the timeless quest for high--resolution
spectrographs reached a milestone at the Anglo--Australian Telescope
with the development of UHRF and its resolving power of up to
$1,000,000$ \citep{diego_et_al1995}.  Despite impressive throughput
relative to previous endeavors, however, its efficiency was
insufficient to obtain the sub decameter--per--second Doppler
precision on a $V \ge 7$ star that would be required for planet
searches.  With a $R_S = 600,000$ spectrograph built at Steward
Observatory, \citet{ge_et_al2002} obtained stellar spectra with $R_S
\sim 250,000$ and throughput of 0.8\%.  Furthermore, they predicted
that by optimizing their technology they could increase the throughput
to 4\%.  More recently, \citet{ge_et_al2006} detected a new planet,
around HD 102195, with the Exoplanet Tracker instrument at Kitt Peak.
This instrument has resolution of $R_S \sim 60,000$ and total
throughput of 18\%.  Plans for a spectrograph that has resolving power
of 120,000 on a thirty meter telescope \citep{tokunaga_et_al2006} give
cause for optimism that increased aperture area and efficiency feeding
high and ultrahigh--resolution spectrographs will, in coming years,
provide accurate enough spectra that tidally locked rotation of
HD209458b has a detectable influence.



\section{A Model of a Planetary Transit}
\label{rot_sec:model}
We consider the spectrum of a star whose companion planet transits
across the face of the stellar disk from Earth's perspective.  The
primary effect of the planet is to reduce the stellar flux at all
wavelengths, but the planet's chemical composition, internal
structure, and rotation rate influence the spectrum in
wavelength--dependent ways.  Since each of these factors -- and others
too, such as the star's rotation -- influences the observed spectrum,
we built a model that incorporates the many parameters related to each
process.  The star and the planet are both assumed to rotate as solid
bodies, with no other (nonthermal) motion in their atmospheres.  Since
deviations from pure solid body rotation are likely to be no more than
25\% over the disk of the star -- e.g., the Sun's equator--to--pole
variation in rotation rate is about 21\%, as per
\citet{howard_et_al1984}, this is probably a reasonable assumption for
the star.  For the planet, this assumption might fail, because
wind--speeds in excess of the equatorial rotation speed of $v_{\rm eq}
\approx 2 {\rm ~km~s^{-1}}$ are predicted by many models, as described
in \S~\ref{rot_sec:intro} above.  Still, when making this initial
study of the spectral effect of the motion of a transiting planet's
atmosphere, separating rotation from other processes makes the problem
more tractable.  We set parameter values to match measured values from
the HD209458b system where possible.

The planet is modeled as an inner component that is entirely opaque
and an outer component that is isothermal and drops off
exponentially. We compute the wavelength--dependent optical depth due
to the sodium D-doublet at $\approx 590$~nm in the planet's
atmosphere; important parameters include the temperature and density
of the planet's atmosphere and its Na--content.  We use the Voigt
profile -- as described by, e.g., \citet{press+rybicki1993} -- to
calculate $\tau[\lambda]$, the optical depth to absorption along the
line of sight.

As the planet transits the star, there are four points of ``contact''
between the planet and the star (really between their projections on
the sky): when the disk of the planet first touches the disk of the
star; when the planet is first entirely over the stellar disk; when
the planet is last entirely over the stellar disk; and when the planet
last touches the stellar disk.  We will additionally sometimes refer
to ``$1.5^{\rm th}$'' contact (half--way between first and second
contact), and analogously to ``$2.5^{\rm th}$'' and ``$3.5^{\rm th}$''
contact.

As described in \S~\ref{rot_sec:overview} above, the type of
distortion that a planet's rotation imposes relative to a
non--rotating planet changes depending on when during the transit the
observation is made.  During ingress or egress, the rotation of a
tidally locked planet's atmosphere will impose a distortion similar to
an overall shift relative to a non--rotating planet: redshift during
ingress; blueshift during egress.  When the planet is in mid--transit,
in the middle of the stellar disk, the overall distortion to the
spectrum imposed by its rotation is akin to a star's rotational
broadening.  Since the line--centers of the lines we are considering
are heavily saturated and therefore flat at their cores, rotational
broadening has the somewhat counterintuitive effect of steepening the
cores of the profiles while broadening the wings.  We will discuss
this in greater detail in the next section.  Although the type of
distortion is different during ingress and egress from during
mid--transit, it turns out that the amount of distortion, in terms of
S/N ratio, is nearly constant throughout transit.  This, too, we will
discuss in \S~\ref{rot_sec:results} below.

We simulate the HD209458b system, with a $1.32 R_J$ planet in a 3.5
day orbit, orbiting a G0 star at with radius $1.05 R_\sun$ that is
47~pc away.  Our model star has the limb darkening profile that
\citet{knutson_et_al2007a} measured for HD209458.  In order to
approximate the fits to the data in \citet{charbonneau_et_al2002}, we
assign our model planet's atmosphere a sodium--content and cloud deck
height (1\% solar, and 0.01~bars) that are comparable to the
parameter--combinations that result in the best fits in that
paper. Finally, we present results at our simulation's spectral
resolution ($R_S = 700,000$), and we simulate transit events observed
using two different lower resolution spectrographs, one with spectral
resolution $R^\prime_S = 50,000$ and one with $R^\prime_S = 150,000$.
All spectrographs (and associated optical paths) in our simulations
have 100\% throughput efficiency.  In the remainder of this section,
we provide a detailed description of our parameterization of the
problem.


\subsection{Parameters of the Star}
\label{rot_ssec:pstar}
The parameters related to the star are listed in Table~\ref{ta:pstar}.
They are set to match measured parameters for HD209458, and we use the
limb--darkening profile from \citet{knutson_et_al2007a}.  We normalize
the flux to that of a blackbody of temperature $T_*$ of the size and
at the distance of HD209458.

%\begin{deluxetable}{llr}
\begin{table}[p]
\begin{center}
%\tablewidth{400pt}
%\tablecolumns{3}
%\small
\caption[Model Transit Parameters: Star]{~~Model Transit Parameters:
Star}
%\tablehead{\colhead{Parameter} & \colhead{Description} & \colhead{Value}}
\vspace{0.2in}
\begin{tabular}{llr}
  \tableline
  \tableline
  Parameter   & Description                    & Value \\[0.1in]
  \tableline
$M_*$         & Star Mass                      & 1.05 $M_\sun = 2.09\times 10^{33} {\rm~g}$\\
$R_*$         & Star Radius                    & 1.05 $R_\sun = 7.35\times 10^{10} {\rm~cm}$\\
$T_*$         & Star Temperature               & 6100 K\\
$d_*$         & Distance to star               & 47 pc\\
$\tau_*$      & Stellar Rotation Period        & 1 month\\
\label{ta:pstar}
\end{tabular}
\vspace{-0.4cm}
\end{center}
\end{table}
%\end{deluxetable}


\subsection{Parameters of the Planet}
\label{rot_ssec:pplanet}
The parameters related to the planet are in Table~\ref{ta:pplanet}.
We model the planet as an inner component that is essentially a
billiard ball (completely opaque at all wavelengths) and an outer
component that is an isothermal atmosphere with scale height $H =
R_{\rm gas}T_p/\mu g$, where $R_{\rm gas}$ is the gas constant, $\mu$
is the molar mass, and $g$ is the acceleration of gravity.  The
density of our model planet's atmosphere varies as $\rho = \rho_0
\exp[(r-{R_p}_0)/H]$, where ${R_p}_0$ is the radius of the optically
thick part (some authors have called this radius the ``cloud--deck''
\citep{charbonneau_et_al2002}).  This hypothetical cloud deck could
cause the planet to be optically thick at a higher altitude than would
otherwise be expected, as discussed in, e.g.,
\citet{richardson_et_al2003} and \citet{sudarsky_et_al2000}.  The
cloud deck causes the optical depth as a function of radius in our
model to have a singular discontinuity at radius ${R_p}_0$.

%\begin{deluxetable}{llr}
\begin{table}[p]
\begin{center}
%\tablewidth{300pt}
%\tablecolumns{3}
%\small
\caption[Model Transit Parameters: Planet]{~~Model Transit Parameters:
Planet.  Parameter values are set to match measured values from the
HD209458b system where possible.}
%\tablehead{\colhead{Parameter} & \colhead{Description} & \colhead{Value}}
%\startdata
\vspace{0.2in}
\begin{tabular}{llr}
  \tableline
  \tableline
  Parameter   & Description                    & Value\\[0.1in]
  \tableline
$M_p$         & Planet Mass                    & $0.69 M_J = 1.31\times 10^{30} {\rm~g}$\\
${R_p}_0$     & Optically Thick Planet Radius  & $1.32 R_J = 9.44\times 10^5 {\rm~km}$\\
$P_0$         & Planet Pressure at ${R_p}_0$   & 0.01 bars\\
$H$           & Planet Atmosphere Scale Height & 500 km\\
$T_p$         & Planet Atmosphere Temperature  & 1300 K\\
$f_{\rm TL}$  & Frac. Tidal Locked Rot. Rate   & 0 or 1 ($v_{\rm eq} = 0$ or $2 {\rm~km~s^{-1}}$)\\
$a$           & Semi--Major Axis               & 0.046 AU\\
$\#_H$         & Number of Scale Heights in Atm. & 15\\
\label{ta:pplanet}
\end{tabular}
\vspace{-0.4cm}
\end{center}
\end{table}
%\end{deluxetable}


\subsection{Spectral Parameters}
\label{rot_ssec:pspec}
The parameters pertaining to the shape of the observed spectrum are in
Table~\ref{ta:pspec}.  In addition to the location of the planet
within the stellar disk, the shape of the stellar spectrum and the
wavelength--dependent opacity of the planet's atmosphere together
influence the transmission spectrum.

{\tt Spec\_Shape} is a parameter that can take on the values ``Flat'',
``Blackbody'', or ``Solar'', and determines the rest--frame spectrum
of the model stellar photosphere.  (The integrated stellar spectrum is
the convolution of the rest--frame spectrum with the stellar rotation
profile.)  When ``Flat'' is chosen, the rest--frame model stellar
spectrum intensity is set to the mean value of the blackbody intensity
in the specified wavelength range $[\lambda_{\rm min},\lambda_{\rm
max}]$, which, in our simulation, is set to $[580 {\rm~nm}, 600
{\rm~nm}]$.  When ``Solar'' is chosen, the model stellar spectrum
instensity is set to a high--resolution solar spectrum that is
normalized to the flux from HD209458\footnote{From {\it
ftp://solarch.tuc.noao.edu/}.}; but the Na D lines in this
high--resolution spectrum have been replaced by Gaussian fits to the
solar lines.

The planet's atmosphere has $N_{\rm abs}$ absorption features, each of
which is due to an element with a given fraction of the solar
abundance.  In the models presented in this paper, $N_{\rm abs} = 2$:
we consider the Na doublet at 588.9950 nm and 589.5924 nm, with sodium
at fractional abundance $f_\sun \equiv {X_{\rm Na~}}_p / {X_{\rm
Na~}}_\sun = 0.01$ of the solar abundance.  Each line is modeled as a
Voigt profile, as described in, e.g., Press \& Rybicki (1993).

%\begin{deluxetable}{llr}
\begin{table}[p]
\begin{center}
%\tablewidth{300pt}
%\tablecolumns{3}
%\small
\caption[Model Transit Parameters: Spectral Features]{~~Model Transit Parameters: Spectral Features.}
%\tablehead{\colhead{Parameter} & \colhead{Description} & \colhead{Value}}
\vspace{0.2in}
\begin{tabular}{llr}
  \tableline
  \tableline
  Parameter\tablenotemark{a} & Description     & Value\\[0.1in]
  \tableline
{\tt Spec\_Shape} &  Shape of Star Spectrum    & Flat, Blackbody, or Solar\\
$\lambda_{\rm min}$ & Min. Wavelength in Sim.  & 580~nm\\
$\lambda_{\rm max}$ & Min. Wavelength in Sim.  & 600~nm\\
$N_{\rm abs}$ & \# Abs. Features in P. Atm.    & 2\\
${f_\sun}_1$  & Frac. Solar Abund., First Line & $0.01$\\
${\lambda_0}_1$ & First Line--Center           & 588.9950 nm\\
${A_{ki}}_1$  & Transition Prob. First Line    & $6.16\times 10^{-9} {\rm~s^{-1}}$\\
${g_i}_1$     & Stat. Wt. Lower Level First Line & 2\\
${g_k}_1$     & Stat. Wt. Upper Level First Line & 4\\
${f_\sun}_2$  & Frac. Solar Abund., Second Line & $0.01$\\
${\lambda_0}_2$ & Second Line--Center          & 589.5924 nm\\
${A_{ki}}_2$  & Transition Prob. Second Line    & $6.14\times 10^{-9} {\rm~s^{-1}}$\\
${g_i}_2$     & Stat. Wt. Lower Level Second Line & 2\\
${g_k}_2$     & Stat. Wt. Upper Level Second Line & 2\\
\label{ta:pspec}
\end{tabular}
\vspace{-0.4cm}
\tablenotetext{a}{In parameters that have $i$ and $k$ subscripts, $i$
indicates the lower level ($3 s_{1/2}$ for both lines) and $k$
indicates the upper level ($3 p_{3/2}$ for the bluer line and $3
p_{1/2}$ for the redder line).  The fractional solar abundance is set
to 0.01 in order to achieve modest agreement with data observed for
the Na D doublet in HD209458b's atmosphere.}
\end{center}
\end{table}
%\end{deluxetable}


\subsection{Parameters of Observing and Computing}
\label{rot_ssec:pobscomp}
The final set of parameters, listed in Table~\ref{ta:pobscomp},
includes those that specify the observer and those that determine how
the observation is discretized for the purpose of numerical
computation.  The model observational setup is determined by three
parameters: the telescope's diameter $D$ (6~m in our simulations) and
efficiency $\eta$ (100\%), and the spectrograph's spectral resolution
$R_S$ (we set $R_S$ to 700,000 for the purpose of computing the model,
and we re--bin to lower, more easily achieved resolutions -- 150,000
and 50,000 -- after computing a model).  These three parameters
prescribe the sizes of the spectral bins and the rate at which those
bins are capable of collecting light.

In order to compute the flux at Earth as a function of wavelength, we
begin by dividing the stellar disk into ${n_b}_*$ concentric annuli,
and we divide each annulus into ${n_\phi}_*$ azimuthal sections.  In
each section, the redshifted spectrum and the normalization must both
be computed.

Knowing the stellar rotation rate and axis, we may calculate the
recessional velocity of any point on the star's surface as a function
of its location on the projected stellar disk, and we redshift the
spectrum from each part of the star accordingly.  When the planet is
in--transit, we separate the stellar disk into an annulus that
contains the planet and the rest of the disk that we treat as
described above.  The annulus that contains the planet is treated
almost as above -- divided into ${n_b}_{*A}$ sub--annuli, each of
which has ${n_\phi}_{*A}$ azimuthal sections -- but the sub--annuli
are incomplete, interrupted by the planet.

In order to sample the planet's atmosphere, we divide the region that
overlaps the star into ${n_b}_p$ concentric annuli around the planet's
center, each of which is divided into ${n_\phi}_p$ azimuthal sections.
In each section, we must determine the optical depth and multiply by
$\exp{\left(-\tau\right)}$.  In calculating the optical depth, we note
that in the case that the planet's rotation axis is entirely normal to
the line--of--sight, if the planet rotates as a solid body then the
radial component of its recessional velocity is constant along a ray:
\begin{equation}
\tau[b_p, \phi, \lambda] = N[b_p] \times \sigma\left[\frac{\lambda}{1 + (v_p[b_p, \phi_p] /c)}\right],
\label{rot_eq:tau}
\end{equation}
where the column density is calculated in terms of a function $G$ that
is specified below: $N[b_p] = n_0 G[b_p, {R_p}_0, H]$.  In
equation~(\ref{rot_eq:tau}), $v_p[b_p, \phi_p]$ is the recessional
velocity of the planet, as a function of radius and azimuth, which
depends upon the orbit and the rotation.  Note that there is a single
$v_p$ along a given line--of--sight defined by a $(b_p,\phi_p)$ pair
only under the assumption of solid body rotation.  The rest--frame
cross--section $\sigma[\lambda]$ is computed according to the Voigt
profile.  The function $G$ is defined as the following integral:
\begin{equation}
G[b_p, {R_p}_0, H] = \left\{ \begin{array}{ll}
\int_{-\infty}^{\infty} \exp\left[-\frac{\sqrt{b^2 + l^2} - {R_p}_0}{H}\right] d l & b_p > R_p \\
\infty & b_p \leq R_p
\end{array} \right. .
\label{rot_eq:funcG}
\end{equation}

%\begin{deluxetable}{llr}
\begin{table}[p]
\begin{center}
%\tablewidth{300pt}
%\tablecolumns{3}
%\small
\caption[Model Transit Parameters: Observation and Computing]{~~Model
Transit Parameters: Observation and Computing.  Parameter values are
set to match measured values from the HD209458b system where
possible.}
%\tablehead{\colhead{Parameter} & \colhead{Description} & \colhead{Value}}
\vspace{0.2in}
\begin{tabular}{llr}
  \tableline
  \tableline
  Parameter  & Description                     & Value\\[0.1in]
  \tableline
$D$           & Telescope Diameter             & $2.4 {\rm~m} - 30 {\rm~m}$\\
$\eta$        & Spectroscope Efficiency        & $1.00$ \\
$R^\prime_S$        & Obs. Spec. Resolution          & 50,000 - 700,000\\
$\mathcal{T}_{\rm int}$ & Integration Time     & $932.088 {\rm~s}$\\
  \tableline
%--------------&--------------------------------&---------------------------\\
$R_S$         & Comp. Spec. Resolution         & 700,000\\
$\Delta t$    & Time--Step in Integration      & $50 {\rm~s}$\\
${n_b}_*$     & \# of Star Annuli               & 10\\
${n_\phi}_*$  & \# of Star Azimuthal Sections   & 16\\
${n_b}_{*A}$  & \# of S. Annuli in P. Annulus   & 10\\
${n_\phi}_{*A}$& \# of S. Azim. Sec.'s in P. Ann. & 10\\
${n_b}_p$     & \# of Planet Atm. Annuli        & 20\\
${n_\phi}_p$  & \# of Planet Atm. Azim. Sections & 20\\
\label{ta:pobscomp}
\end{tabular}
\vspace{-0.4cm}
\end{center}
\end{table}
%\end{deluxetable}


\section{Model Transit Spectra}
\label{rot_sec:results}
As described in \S~\ref{rot_ssec:preview}, we seek the expected
signal--to--noise ratio for distinguishing between the spectrum that
would be observed due to a non--rotating planet (or one that is is in
a Cassini state with its rotation axis nearly in the plane of orbit)
and the spectrum that would be observed due to a tidally locked
planet.  The computed model spectrum $\mathcal{N}[\lambda]$ is the
time integral of the instantaneous spectrum
$\dot{\mathcal{N}}[\lambda]$ and consists of the number of photons
detected per wavelength bin:
\[
\mathcal{N}[\lambda] \approx \dot{\mathcal{N}}[\lambda] \Delta t_{\rm obs},
\]
for some small exposure time $\Delta t_{\rm obs}$.

The model signal (of rotation) per bin that we are looking for is the
difference between the rotating model spectrum $\mathcal{N}_{\rm rot}$
and the non--rotating model spectrum $\mathcal{N}_{\rm no~rot}$:
\begin{equation}
S_b = \left(\dot{\mathcal{N}}_{\rm rot}[\lambda] - \dot{\mathcal{N}}_{\rm no~rot}[\lambda]\right) \Delta t_{\rm obs}.
\label{rot_eq:signal}
\end{equation}
We make the optimistic approximation that the noise per bin is just
the photon--noise:
\begin{equation}
N_b = \sqrt{\dot{\mathcal{N}}_{\rm no~rot}[\lambda] \Delta t_{\rm obs}}.
\label{rot_eq:noise}
\end{equation}
The total signal--to--noise ratio in a single exposure, then, is the
sum in quadrature of $S_b/N_b$ for all wavelength bins $\lambda_i$:
\begin{equation}
S/N = \sqrt{\sum_{i = 1}^{\# \rm bins} \left( \frac{\dot{\mathcal{N}}_{\rm rot}[\lambda_i] - \dot{\mathcal{N}}_{\rm no~rot}[\lambda_i]}{\sqrt{\dot{\mathcal{N}}_{\rm no~rot}[\lambda_i]}} \right)^2 } \times \sqrt{\Delta t_{\rm obs}}.
\label{rot_eq:sn}
\end{equation}
A similar summation in quadrature applies over all exposures.  Note
that, in principle, the expression in equation~(\ref{rot_eq:sn}) is
insensitive to the sizes of bins and hence to the spectral resolution
$R_S$, as long as the bins are small relative to the Gaussian width of
the absorption feature under consideration.  Our simulations indicate
that the spectral resolution must be $\gsim 500,000$ in order for S/N
to be nearly independent of $R_S$.

The effect of rotation, both during ingress and during mid--transit,
is illustrated in Figure~\ref{rot_fig:spec. and diff.}.  For
illustrative purposes, in this figure we assume a uniform star (flat
spectrum, non--rotating, no limb--darkening).  On the left panels of
Figure~\ref{rot_fig:spec. and diff.}, we show a snap--shot during
ingress (at $1.5^{\rm th}$ contact) and on the right, we show a
snap--shot during the middle of a transit ($2.5^{\rm th}$ contact).
The quantity plotted is $\mathcal{R}' = \mathcal{R}-1$ from B01, where
\begin{equation}
\mathcal{R}[\lambda,t] = \frac{\dot{N}_{\rm in~transit}[\lambda,t]}{\dot{N}_{\rm out~of~transit}[\lambda,t]}
\label{rot_eq:Brown R}
\end{equation}
The bottom panels of Figure~\ref{rot_fig:spec. and diff.} show the
difference spectra between the models with a tidally locked planet and
the models with a non--rotating planet ($\mathcal{R}_{\rm rot} -
\mathcal{R}_{\rm no~rot}$).
\begin{figure}[p]
\plotone{figures/chapter4_rot/fig2.eps}
\caption[Na D line spectra, rot. vs. non-rot; and difference.]{Upper
panels show snap--shot spectra for one of the the Na D lines for two
different model planets (tidally locked and non--rotating); lower
panels show the difference between the two model spectra.The
quantities plotted are $\mathcal{R}' = \mathcal{R}-1$ (upper panels)
and $\Delta \mathcal{R}'$ (lower panels), where
$\mathcal{R}[\lambda,t] = \dot{N}_{\rm
in~transit}[\lambda,t]/\dot{N}_{\rm out~of~transit}[\lambda,t]$.  In
the upper panels, the blue curve is the tidally locked planet's
transit spectrum, and the green curve is the non--rotating planet's
transit spectrum.  In the lower panels, the difference between the
rotating and non--rotating planet's spectra.  {\it Left}: Halfway
through ingress (at $1.5^{\rm th}$ contact).  {\it Right}: Halfway
through the whole transit ($2.5^{\rm th}$ contact).}
\label{rot_fig:spec. and diff.}
\end{figure}
\afterpage{\clearpage}

As described in \S~\ref{rot_sec:overview} above, a planet's rotation
causes the centroids of stellar absorption features to shift relative
to a non--rotating planet.  In Figure~\ref{rot_fig:delta v}, centroid
shifts (in velocity units) are plotted as a function of position in
transit, for a planet transiting in front of a realistic star model
with a Sun--like spectrum. The recessional velocity increases roughly
sinusoidally during ingress, reaching a peak of about $60 {\rm
~cm~s^{-1}}$ at $1.5^{\rm th}$ contact.  During mid--transit, between
$2^{\rm nd}$ and $3^{\rm rd}$ contacts, the net velocity shift is much
smaller.  Egress is nearly perfectly symmetrical with ingress, though
the velocity shifts have the opposite sign.
\begin{figure}[p]
\plotone{figures/chapter4_rot/fig3.eps}
\caption[Centroid--shift of Na D lines due to tidally locked rotation,
relative to an identical but non--rotating planet.]{Centroid--shift of
Na D lines from tidally locked rotation from the beginning to the end
of a transit, relative to an identical but non--rotating planet;
Sun--like stellar spectrum.  The vertical lines denote $1.5^{\rm th}$
and $3.5^{\rm th}$ contact (cyan) and second and third contact
(magenta).  Between first and second contact, the spectrum with the
rotating planet is redshifted relative to the non--rotating planet by
up to about $60 {\rm ~cm~s^{-1}}$; between third and fourth contact,
it is blueshifted by the same amount.  This plot samples the transit
at 60 regularly--spaced points.  Parameters were chosen to represent
the HD209458 system.}
\label{rot_fig:delta v}
\end{figure}
\afterpage{\clearpage}

The cumulative and incremental signal--to--noise ratio across the
transit are shown in the top and bottom panels, respectively, of
Figure~\ref{rot_fig:inc. and cum.}.  As a planet proceeds in its
transit from first contact to fourth contact, the S/N builds up
steadily throughout the transit, as can be seen in the top panel of
this figure.  This cumulative increase reflects the steady incremental
S/N per second of observation, which, for a planet crossing in front
of a uniform star, is shown in the bottom panel.  The three curves in
the bottom panel represent, in decreasing order of S/N, the
incremental S/N curves that are expected for a spectrograph with
ultrahigh--resolution (the simulation's resolution $R_S = 700,000$),
for a spectrograph with as high--resolution as bHROS on Gemini
($R^\prime_S = 150,000$), and for a spectrograph with more standard
high--resolution ($R^\prime_S = 50,000$).  In the top panel, we show
the cumulative S/N (assuming the simulation's resolution) for a planet
in front of a uniform star, and for a planet in front of a more
realistic sun--like star that rotates once per month, has a
limb--darkening profile, and has a solar spectrum.  It is apparent in
the top panel of Figure~\ref{rot_fig:inc. and cum.} that a
spectrograph with our simulation's resolution would see the effect of
rotation at $S/N = 7.1 \eta^{1/2}$ in a single transit in the case of
the simplified uniform star, and at $S/N = 3.2 \eta^{1/2}$ in one
transit of the realistic star.  The effect of including in the
simulation the realistic features of stellar rotation,
limb--darkening, and a solar spectrum is therefore to depress the S/N
of the effect of tidally locked rotation by a factor of slightly more
than 2.  The bottom panel of the figure indicates that our predicted
S/N for one transit of a realistic star ($3.2 \eta^{1/2}$) might be
adjusted downward by $\sim 50\%$, depending on the spectral
resolution, indicating a total one--transit S/N for the case of the
realistic star of about $\sim 1.7 \eta^{1/2}$.  Finally, we do not
show the incremental S/N for the realistic star model, but, as the top
panel of the figure indicates, a larger proportion of the total signal
comes from ingress and egress in the realistic star model than in the
uniform star model.
\begin{figure}[p]
\plotone{figures/chapter4_rot/fig4.eps}
\caption[S/N for distinguishing rot. vs. non-rot. planet, vs. $t$,
across transit.]{{\it Top}: S/N for distinguishing between a rotating
and a non--rotating planet, accumulated during a single transit.
Upper curve displays the cumulative S/N for the distinction of a
tidally locked planet from a non-rotating model, assuming a completely
uniform star: the model star has a flat spectrum, is not rotating, and
there is no limb--darkening.  Lower curve displays the same, but for a
more realistic star: the model star rotates once per month, has the
limb--darkening profile determined by \citet{knutson_et_al2007a}, and
has a solar spectrum.  These curves assume the spectral resolution
used in the simulation ($R_S = 700,000$); for more easily achievable
spectral resolution, these curves are adjusted downward by 30\% -
80\%, as displayed in the bottom panel.  The vertical lines denote
$1.5^{\rm th}$ and $3.5^{\rm th}$ contact (cyan) and second and third
contact (magenta).  Also, both top and bottom panels show model
results assuming 100\% throughput efficiency ($\eta = 100\%$).  In
practice, these curves would be adjusted downward by a factor
$\eta^{1/2}$, or $\sim 0.04^{1/2} = 0.2$ for an ultrahigh resolution
spectrograph.  {\it Bottom}: Incremental S/N for sixty 1--second
observations across the transit, assuming a uniform, non--rotating
star with a flat spectrum.  Top curve shows the incremental S/N,
assuming a spectrograph with the spectral resolution of the simulation
($R_S = 700,000$).  Middle and bottom curves show the same, assuming
spectral resolutions $R^\prime_S = 150,000$ and $R^\prime_S = 50,000$,
respectively.  Parameters of the system (except for the stellar
spectrum in the bottom panel) were chosen to represent the HD209458
system.}
\label{rot_fig:inc. and cum.}
\end{figure}



\section{Discussion}
\label{rot_sec:disc}
The $S/N$ scales with the square root of the number of absorption
lines under consideration, with the square root of the number of
transits, and with several other parameters, as follows:
\begin{eqnarray}
\nonumber S/N & \sim & 
  \left( \sqrt{\frac{N_{\rm abs}}{2} } \right)
  \left( \sqrt{ \#~\rm transits} \right)
  \left( \frac{D \sqrt{\eta}}{\rm 6~m} \right) \times \\
\nonumber & &
  10^{-0.2(V_*-V_0)} \times
  \left(\frac{R_*}{R_0}\right)^{-2}
  \left(\frac{R_p H}{{R_p}_0 H_0}\right)
  \left(\frac{v}{2000 \rm~m~s^{-1}}\right) \times \\
\label{rot_eq:snscale} & &
  \left(\psi\left[R^\prime_S\right]\right)
  \left( S/N \right)_0
\end{eqnarray}
In this equation, $N_{\rm abs}$ is the number of absorption lines, $D$
is the telescope's diameter, $\eta$ is the efficiency of the
instrumental setup, $V_*$ is the star's magnitude, $V_0$ is HD209458's
magnitude (about 7.6), $R_*$ is the stellar radius, $R_0$ is
HD209458's radius, $R_p$ and $H$ are the planet's radius and scale
height, and ${R_p}_0$ and $H_0$ are HD209458b's radius and scale
height.  $\psi[R^\prime_S]$ is a function that characterizes the
(nonlinear) response of S/N to the spectral resolution of the
spectrograph; for instance, $\psi[700,000] \approx 1$, $\psi[150,000]
\sim 0.6$ and $\psi[50,000] \sim 0.2$.  Finally, $(S/N)_0 = 7.1$ for a
uniform star and ${X_{\rm Na~}}_p/{X_{\rm Na~}}_\sun = 0.01$; and
$(S/N)_0 = 3.2$ for a more realistic (rotating, limb--darkened) star
with a solar spectrum.

Culling the signal from mid--transit, however, is much more difficult
than from ingress and egress, because the shape of the distortion
depends more sensitively on the structure of the planet.  For the
realistic star, our model predicts $S/N \sim 1.3 \eta^{1/2}$ (with the
6~m telescope, with Poisson--dominated photon noise) for ingress
alone, and therefore a factor $2^{1/2}$ greater, or $S/N \sim 1.8
\eta^{1/2}$ for ingress and egress.

In Table~\ref{ta:norbits}, we present the number of orbits that must
be observed in order to make a $5\sigma$ detection of rotation, for
various combinations of parameters.  In all cases, we assume a
realistically achievable optical setup, with spectral resolution
$R^\prime_S = 150,000$ and throughput $\eta = 4\%$.  Improvement in
$R^\prime_S$ will yield a modest improvement in S/N, and improvement
in $\eta$ could be quite significant.  In the third column of
Table~\ref{ta:norbits} (A), we present the total available S/N for the
whole transit, according to our model, while in the fourth column (B),
we present the available S/N from just ingress and egress.  The fifth
and sixth columns are based on the S/N in the fourth column.

%\begin{deluxetable}{crcccr}
\begin{table}[p]
\begin{center}
%\tablewidth{240pt}
%\tablecolumns{6}
%\small
\caption[Required Number of Transits For $5\sigma$
Detection.]{Required number of transits to achieve a $S/N =5$
detection of tidally locked rotation of HD209458b, assuming a
planetary Na--content that is 1\% solar.  Assumptions: we are
monitoring two spectral lines (the Na doublet) with a spectrograph
with resolving power $R^\prime_S = 150,000$, and an efficiency in the
optical setup of $0.04$.  The third column ``(S/N)/Tr. (A)'' is the
S/N per transit, as shown in Figure~\ref{rot_fig:inc. and cum.}, and
the fourth column is the S/N per transit, considering only ingress and
egress.  The ``(A)'' in the fifth and sixth columns indicates that the
numbers of transits and the required duration are tabulated for S/N
values from column three.}
\vspace{0.2in}
\begin{tabular}{crcccr}
  \tableline
  \tableline
      {\tt Spec\_Shape}  & $D$ & (S/N)/Tr. (A) & (S/N)/Tr. (B) & \# Trans. (A)\tablenotemark{a} & Dur. (A)\tablenotemark{b}\\[0.1in]
  \tableline
Flat (unif. star)  &  6~m  &  1.1  &  0.52 &  $\sim 25$   & $\sim 3$  months \\
Solar                &  6~m  &  0.48 &  0.27 &  $\sim 110$  & $\sim 1.25$ years \\
Solar                &  10~m &  0.79 &  0.45 &  $\sim 40$   & $\sim 5$ months \\
Solar                &  30~m &  2.4  &  1.3  &  $\sim 5$    & $\sim 3$  weeks \\
\label{ta:norbits}
\end{tabular}
\vspace{-0.4cm}
%
\tablenotetext{a}{The required number of transits for a $5\sigma$
detection of tidally locked rotation, using S/N values from column
three.}
%
\tablenotetext{b}{HD209458b completes the number of orbits indicated in column 5 in the amount of time indicated in this column.}
%
\end{center}
\end{table}
%\end{deluxetable}

Finally, as a sanity check, our model can be tested by comparing it to
the analysis of \citet{charbonneau_et_al2002}.  That analysis suggests
that the sodium content of a planet's atmosphere can be determined by
comparing the flux in a narrow band centered on the sodium resonance
lines with the flux in a wider band surrounding but excluding the
lines.  In that paper, the decrement in the narrow band containing the
sodium features is named $n_{\rm Na}$, and was measured to be
$-2.32\times 10^{-4}$ for HD209458 during the middle of transit.  They
presented several models, all of which over--predicted the sodium
decrement.  The model that predicted the smallest magnitude of the
decrement had 1\% solar metalicity and cloud deck at $0.0368 {\rm
~bar}$; this model predicts $n_{\rm Na} \sim -3.4 \times 10^{-4}$ in
mid--transit.  Our model (1\% solar metalicity, cloud deck at $0.01
{\rm ~bar}$) predicts $\sim -4.1 \times 10^{-4}$ in mid--transit, as
shown in Figure~\ref{rot_fig:charbonneau}.  We conclude that our model
is in reasonable agreement with both Charbonneau et al.'s model ($\sim
20\%$) and with the actual data ($\sim 40\%$).
\begin{figure}[p]
\plotone{figures/chapter4_rot/fig5.eps}
\caption[Flux decrement due to neutral Na in planet's atmosphere,
across transit.]{The flux decrement due to sodium in the planet's
atmosphere, as shown by the quantity $n_{\rm Na}$ defined by
\citet{charbonneau_et_al2002}.  This decrement reaches a maximum in
magnitude of $-4.1 \times 10^{-4}$, halfway through transit, in our
model.}
\label{rot_fig:charbonneau}
\end{figure}
\afterpage{\clearpage}



\section{Conclusion}
\label{rot_sec:conc}
Our investigation indicates that, with currently available
instruments, it will be difficult to obtain the sensitivity needed to
achieve a minimal $S/N \gsim 5$ detection of tidally locked rotation
of the planet HD209458b.  Nevertheless, it appears that the effect of
rotation will have significant (though small) influence on
transit--spectra taken with current or near--future instruments.
Because this influence is so small, it is worth considering ways that
the $S/N$ could be improved, according to the scalings summarized in
equation~(\ref{rot_eq:snscale}).

\begin{itemize}
\item The most obvious way to boost S/N is to increase the collecting
area of the telescope, the effect of which is shown in
Table~\ref{ta:norbits}.  With an extremely large (30~m--class)
telescope, the required discrimination power could be achieved in
$\sim 5-15$ transits, if our optimistic assumptions about the noise
are not too far off.
\item As the abundances of other elements or molecules in the planet's
atmosphere are identified, the number of absorption lines $N_{\rm
abs}$ that can be utilized can increase.  Observing four absorption
features instead of two will boost the $S/N$ per orbit by $2^{1/2}$
and will therefore cut in half the required observing time to achieve
a fixed target $S/N$.
\item The HD189733 system is only 19.3~pc away
\citep{bouchy_et_al2005}, but the star is smaller and dimmer than
HD209458, and has the same apparent magnitude.  We find that, overall,
it has no relative advantage in terms of $S/N$.  It may be unlikely
that a star significantly brighter than HD209458 will be found to have
a transiting giant planet companion, but if this should happen the
signature of rotation will be more readily apparent in the system with
the brighter star.
\item Finally, since S/N is proportional to the size of the
atmosphere, represented by $\delta_{\rm atm}$ in
equation~(\ref{rot_eq:SN estimate}), a planet with a more extended
atmosphere would show the distortion due to rotation more readily.
The size of the atmosphere depends on the product of $R_p$ and the
height of the atmosphere $\Pi_{\rm atm} \sim 15 H$, so the S/N could
be increased in the case of a larger planet, a hotter one, or one with
lower surface gravity.  Unfortunately, although some other planets are
somewhat larger, none of the puffier planets that have been discovered
so far happen to transit a star as bright as HD209458.  If a more
bloated planet is found to transit a star as bright as HD209458, such
a planet would probably be a more promising target for the type of
study described in this paper.
\end{itemize}

Although the optical transit spectrum of an extrasolar giant planet
contains many precious clues regarding the nature of rotation and
climate or weather, we emphasize that we have so far addressed only
the forward problem: deep, high spectral resolution transit spectra
{\it will} be distorted by HD209458b's tidally locked rotation, if
indeed it is tidally locked.  But seeing the effect of rotation in a
spectrum and {\it knowing} that we are seeing the effect of rotation
are two very different things.  The inverse problem -- identifying the
rotation rate -- will be much more challenging, and is beyond the
scope of this paper's investigation.  In brief, it is impossible to
decode the clues that the spectrum holds without a Rosetta stone --
namely, without already possessing accurate knowledge of abundances in
the planet's atmosphere.  We note that when it comes to solving the
inverse problem, it may be possible to make do without a perfect
Rosetta stone by comparing the star's spectrum at two different times
of transit instead of comparing it to an accurate input model.
Specifically, comparing the ingress spectrum to the egress spectrum
should eliminate various systematic uncertainties that may effect both
ingress and egress spectra.  This strategy involves foregoing spectra
between second and third contacts, at a cost of a factor of $\sim 2$
in $S/N$, but has the advantage of being more robust with respect to
errors in modeling the planetary atmosphere. Furthermore, if detailed
analysis along the lines of \citet{charbonneau_et_al2002} should
reveal many more planetary absorption features, a large
current--generation telescope could detect the motion of an extrasolar
planet's atmosphere in of order a month.

A final point to keep in mind is that the technique presented in this
paper is not limited to discerning the difference between a tidally
locked planet and a non--rotating planet; this technique can be used
to investigate the applicability of any model of the motion of a
transiting planet's atmosphere.  Some atmospheric circulation models
of Hot Jupiters predict extremely fast winds, up to $\sim 9 {\rm
~km~s^{-1}}$, or more then four times the predicted equatorial
rotation rate.  It might therefore turn out to be easier to detect
winds than to detect rotation.  Moreover, if an analysis similar to
the one described here were to find a deviation from the hypothesis of
tidally locked rotation, this would mean that {\it something}
interesting is going on -- the planet could be rotating roughly as a
solid body but at a different rate; there could be significant
non--rotational motion in the atmosphere; or there could be some
combination of these phenomena.
